---
date: 2025-08-06 08:00:00+02:00
slug: sp-requirements-v20250901
tags:
  - policy
  - sp-requirements
  - versioned
title: Requirements for SAML2 Service Providers v20250901
url: /technical/saml2/sp-requirements/v20250901.html
---

> Changes to the Requirements for SAML2 Service Providers that are purely technical must reach rough consensus/no opposition among SAFIRE's service advisory group. Changes to the administrative requirements are synchronised with the Metadata Registration Practice Statement. This version is aligned with the [2025 baseline changes]({{< ref "/safire/news/20250901-baseline-changes.md" >}}).
{.message-box}

The following describes the technical and administrative checks made before a service provider is admitted into the SAFIRE federation within the SAML2 Technology Profile. It also serves as a checklist for service provider operators for assessing their readiness to participate.

# Metadata

In order to be included in the federation registry, service provider metadata:-

  * MUST[^BCP14] have an entityID that is a URL (well-known location). The URL SHOULD use the https scheme[^RFC2818] and it is RECOMMENDED that valid metadata be available at this URL.
  * MUST use secure (https) end-points for any `<md:AssertionConsumerService>`, `<md:SingleLogoutService>` or `<md:ArtifactResolutionService>`.
  * MUST contain an `<md:Organization>` element, where:
    * `<md:OrganizationName>` MUST reflect the legal name of the juristic person.
    * `<md:OrganizationDisplayName>` MUST be present and SHOULD reflect a commonly known or shortened version of the organisation's name
    * `<md:OrganizationURL>` MUST contain the organisation's web site address.
  * MUST contain at least one `<md:ContactPerson>` of `contactType="technical"` and SHOULD contain one of `contactType="support"`. Where `<md:EmailAddress>` is given this SHOULD be a role account rather than an individual.
  * MUST contain at least one `<md:ContactPerson>` conforming to the [REFEDS Security Contact Metadata Extension](https://refeds.org/metadata/contactType/security) that reflects the entity's [security contact(s)](https://wiki.refeds.org/display/SIRTFI/Choosing+a+Sirtfi+Contact). It is further RECOMMENDED that entities consider whether they can attest [Sirtfi compliance]({{< ref "/technical/saml2/sirtfi/_index.md" >}}).
  * MUST contain an `<mdui:UIInfo>`, with English versions for at least the following elements set:
    * `<mdui:DisplayName>` --- meaningful name for service.
    * `<mdui:Description>` --- short (max 140 chars) explanation of the purpose of the service, such that it is reasonably apparent why the attributes requested are required.
    * `<mdui:PrivacyStatementURL>` --- web site containing a copy of the service provider's privacy policy.
    * `<mdui:Logo>` -- a logo representing the service. Logos MUST be either served from a secure (https) server or expressed as a data: URI[^RFC2397]. At least one logo SHOULD have an aspect ratio as close to 1:1 as possible and SHOULD be at least 100x100 pixels (although 300x300 is RECOMMENDED). Ideally, logos should be smaller than 40KB.
  * SHOULD NOT contain a `<mdrpi:RegistrationInfo>` element (any existing one SHALL be removed by the federation agregator)
  * MUST contain `<md:RequestedAttribute>` entries unless no attributes are requested.
  * MAY contain a `<mdattr:EntityAttribute>` esignalling the requirement for SAML V2.0 Subject Identifier Attributes[^SAML-SubjectID-v1.0].
  * MAY contain one or more Entity Category or Entity Category Support `<mdattr:EntityAttribute>` elements[^RFC8409]. Where such elements include a well-known identifier, the entity described MUST meet all the eligibility criteria associated with that identifier, including any additional requirements published by the Federation Operator.
  * Certificates included in `<ds:X509Certificate>` elements and used for assertion signing or encryption:
    * [SHOULD be self-signed]({{< ref "/technical/resources/generating-certificates-for-safire.md" >}}).
    * MUST use public keys that contain least 2048 bits (RSA) or 256 bits (EC). It is RECOMMENDED that new RSA deployments use key lengths of at least 3072 bits.
    * MUST have a Validity Period[^RFC5280] of more than 1 year. Certificates [SHOULD be replaced]({{< ref "/technical/resources/certificate-key-roll-over.md" >}}) before they expire.
    * MUST NOT reuse private key material for public-facing web servers or other non-SAML purposes.
  * Web server certificates used for end-points MUST use PKI that is reasonably likely to be embedded in the browser of all users of the service. Unless an explanation is provided, these SHALL be tested against the root CA lists of common browsers.
  * Where cryptographic signatures are required in SAML, these MUST NOT use algorithms based on MD5 or SHA1; use of RSA-SHA256 is RECOMMENDED.

Note: SAFIRE curates metadata to ensure both technical correctness and compliance with administrative controls. Changes to metadata are **not** automatically propagated. Organisations that need to make changes to their metadata need to submit a [change request]({{< ref "/technical/saml2/forms/_index.md" >}})..

# Language and Localisation

The SAML metadata specification allows display elements such as `<md:OrganizationName>` to be localised by using the `xml:lang` attribute to specify a BCP 47[^BCP47] language code. In common with other federations worldwide, English (`xml:lang="en"`) MUST always be included and will be used as the default when no localised version is available.

It is strongly RECOMMENDED that official translations of organisation, display, or service names be included in metadata. In particular, prominent South African languages such as isiZulu (zu), isiXhosa (xh) and/or Afrikaans (af) are encouraged.

# Technical

  * Clocks MUST be synchronised via the Network Time Protocol (NTP; SNTP) or equivalent such that they ultimately derive their time from the South African master clock maintained by the National Metrology Institute of South Africa or an acceptable alternative (e.g. za.pool.ntp.org).
  * Logs of successful authentications MUST be retained for at least 184 days.
  * Federation metadata MUST be refreshed at least once per day and SHOULD be refreshed at least once per cacheDuration.

# Administrative

  * Participants that are not already signatories of the REN Service Agreement MUST provide documentary proof of legal name by means of one of the following:
    * CIPC registration certificate;
    * Trust deed;
    * SARS tax clearance certificate;
    * NPO registration; OR
    * Any other mutually acceptable means.
  * Participants MUST have signed a [Participation Agreement]({{< ref "/safire/policy/participation/_index.md" >}}).
  * Above paperwork SHOULD only to be completed for the first `<md:SPSSODescriptor>`. A given Participant MAY register more than one service provider, and subsequent ones are assumed to be bound by the same agreement.
  * Each entity must be accompanied by a separate [registration request form]({{< ref "/technical/saml2/forms/_index.md" >}}).

For each `<md:SPSSODescriptor>`, the Federation Operator and Particpant MUST agree on:

  * Statement of purpose to be reflected in `<mdui:Description>`.
  * [Attribute release policy]({{< ref "/safire/policy/arp/_index.md" >}}) to be reflected as `<md:RequestedAttribute>` --- note that per the principle of minimality, requested attributes MUST be adequate, relevant, and not excessive.
  * The basis for processing for any personal information (determining whether the transfer notice will inform or request consent)
  * Whether the entity meets the requirements for [research and scholarship](https://refeds.org/category/research-and-scholarship).
  * Whether the entity should be published into inter-federation metadata (opt-in).

[^BCP14]: The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [BCP 14](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14).
[^BCP47]: Phillips, A., Ed., and M. Davis, Ed., "Tags for Identifying Languages", [BCP 47](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp47), September 2009
[^RFC2397]: Masinter, L., "The 'data' URL scheme", [RFC 2397](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2397), August 1998.
[^RFC2818]: Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, DOI 10.17487/[RFC 2818](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2818), May 2000
[^RFC5280]: From [RFC 5280](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5280): "The period of time from notBefore through notAfter, inclusive."
[^SAML-SubjectID-v1.0]: OASIS Committee Specification, Cantor, S. Ed., "SAML V2.0 Subject Identifier Attributes Profile Version 1.0". Latest version: <https://docs.oasis-open.org/security/saml-subject-id-attr/v1.0/saml-subject-id-attr-v1.0.html>.
[^RFC8409]: Young, I., Johansson, L., Cantor, S., "The Entity Category Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) Attribute Types", [RFC8409](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8409), August 2018
