---
date: 2025-06-27 15:30:00+02:00
slug: arp-v20250627
tags:
  - arp
  - policy
  - versioned
title: Attribute Release Policy v20250627
url: /safire/policy/arp/v20250627.html
---

> As a revision to the previous version, this ARP refines the REFEDS entity-category based release and makes provision for anonymous and pseudonymous release.
{.message-box}

Management of attribute release to Service Providers has been delegated to the Federation Operator in terms of the [Participation Agreement]({{< ref "/safire/policy/participation/_index.md" >}}).

# Attribute Release Profiles

Through a community consensus process, the following attribute release profiles have been approved:

### Default

The Default release profile used when no other attribute release policy is defined:

  * [eduPersonAffiliation]({{< ref "/technical/attributes/edupersonaffiliation.md" >}})
  * [eduPersonScopedAffiliation]({{< ref "/technical/attributes/edupersonscopedaffiliation.md" >}})
  * [eduPersonTargetedID]({{< ref "/technical/attributes/edupersontargetedid.md" >}})
  * [schacHomeOrganizationType]({{< ref "/technical/attributes/schachomeorganizationtype.md" >}})

### Research & Scholarship

This legacy attribute release profile is no longer in use. See [REFEDS Entity Categories]({{< ref "#refeds-entity-categories" >}}).

### REFEDS Entity Categories

The REFEDS Entity Categories release profile does not a define a specific set of attributes. Instead it is the superset of attributes specified in various supported REFEDS attribute bundles identified in metadata by [entity categories](https://wiki.refeds.org/display/ENT/Entity-Categories+Home). This profile is used when a service provider's metadata is tagged with one or more of the supported entity categories but no negotiated service-specific attribute release policy is specified.

Currently supported entity categories are:
  * Anonymous Access [[https://refeds.org/category/anonymous](https://refeds.org/category/anonymous)]
  * Pseudonymous Access [[https://refeds.org/category/pseudonymous](https://refeds.org/category/pseudonymous)]
  * Research and Scholarship (R&S) [[http://refeds.org/category/research-and-scholarship](http://refeds.org/category/research-and-scholarship)]

The service provider will receive the minimal attribute bundle required by the SAML profile of the corresponding specification. Where a service provider is tagged with more than one supported entity category, it will receive the combined superset of those attributes (e.g. R&S + Pseudonymous Access). Where required by the specification, such providers must have a privacy notice, and a link to this will be displayed to end users during the login process.

> While all SAFIRE identity providers [automatically support]({{< ref "/technical/attributes/_index.md#minimum-attributes-required-for-participation" >}}) the Research and Scholarship v1.3 and Anonymous Access v.2 attribute bundles, attribute availblity for other REFEDS entity categories varies by identity provider.
{.message-box .info}

### REFEDS Code of Conduct v2

Service providers that do not have a negotiated service-specific attribute release policy and that are tagged with the REFEDS Data Protection Code of Conduct v2 entity category ([https://refeds.org/category/code-of-conduct/v2](https://refeds.org/category/code-of-conduct/v2)) will receive any [supported attributes]({{< ref "/technical/attributes/_index.md" >}}) they request.

> CoCo providers have demonstrated compliance with the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and have commited to a voluntary Code of Conduct drafted by the research federation community. They request only the minimal set of attributes required to make their service function. Such providers must have a privacy notice, and a link to this will be displayed to end users during the login process.
{.message-box .info}

### Negotiated

Individual service providers can negotiate a customised attribute release policy on a per-entity basis, based on the [principle of minimality](https://lawlibrary.org.za/akn/za/act/2013/4/eng@2013-11-26#chp_3__part_A__sec_10) --- requested attributes must be adequate, relevant, and not excessive.

A list of all supported attributes [is available]({{< ref "/technical/attributes/_index.md" >}}).

> We are unlikely to release personally-identifiable information unless the service provider's metadata includes a [`<mdui:PrivacyStatementURL xml:lang="en">`](https://docs.oasis-open.org/security/saml/Post2.0/sstc-saml-metadata-ui/v1.0/os/sstc-saml-metadata-ui-v1.0-os.html#__RefHeading__10397_1021935550) element that points to a privacy notice that explains how the requested attributes will be used, preferably written in plain English. This is a [requirement]({{< ref "/technical/saml2/sp-requirements/_index.md" >}}) for SAFIRE-registered service providers.
{.message-box .info}

# Inter-federation

The release profiles above apply irrespective of whether we learn about a service provider via inter-federation (e.g. eduGAIN) or whether they are [direct participants]({{< ref "/participants/sp/_index.md" >}}). This means that, for example, service providers tagged as meeting the Research & Scholarship requirements by another federation will automatically have our Research & Scholarship release profile applied.

However, in practice, how we apply the [Negotiated release profile](#negotiated) differs depending on whether we've learnt about a service provider via inter-federation or whether they're a direct participant.

For service providers learnt via inter-federation we are generally willing to negotiate attribute release of any attributes listed in the Research & Scholarship profile provided that at least one [participating identity provider]({{< ref "/participants/idp/list.md" >}}) has expressed interest in using the service. Service providers who require more attributes than the R&S profile supports _may_ be requested to [join]({{< ref "/participants/sp/join.md" >}}) the Federation as a direct participant, particularly where those attributes constitute [personal information](https://lawlibrary.org.za/akn/za/act/2013/4/eng@2013-11-26#chp_1__sec_1).

