---
date: 2018-12-07T12:46:00+02:00
slug: privacy-v20181207
tags:
  - policy
  - privacy
  - versioned
title: Privacy Statement v20181207
url: /safire/policy/privacy/v20181207.html
---

_Changes to the Privacy Statement are approved by the SAFIRE Steering Committee. This version was ratified on 7 December 2018. It is a complete rewrite of [v20161221]({{< relref "v20161221.md" >}})._

The South African Identity Federation (SAFIRE) exists to
[simplify access]({{< ref "/users/who-why-what.md" >}}) to content,
services and resources for the global research and education community.

The basic principle underpinning the security of SAFIRE is that the
authentication of a user is carried out at his/her home institution
(Identity Provider, IdP) using the institution’s specific authentication
method. The authorisation required to allow access to the requested
service is carried out by the service provider (SP). Thus whilst SAFIRE
is operated by [TENET](https://www.tenet.ac.za/), the service as it
appears to end-users consists of many legal entities.

SAFIRE respects your rights under the [Protection of Personal Information
Act, 2013](http://www.justice.gov.za/inforeg/) and related legislation,
and this Privacy Statement exists to ensure you know how we process
your personal information.

## Why we process Personal Information

SAFIRE [processes personal information during login]({{< ref "/users/how.md" >}})
in order to transfer it from your home identity provider to the
service provider you are trying to log into.

We collect a small amount of end-user personal information for
logging and statistical purposes, as well as to facilitate our internal
operations.

We also process personal information that has been made available to us
in the metadata aggregates we get from [participants](/participants/),
and from other federations via the [eduGAIN inter-federation](https://edugain.org/).

## What Personal Information we process

SAFIRE processes the following information:

  * When as an end-user[^POPI] \(data subject), you log in via the
    Federation Hub, we act as an operator[^POPI] \(data processor) on
    behalf of our participants who are the responsible party[^POPI] \(data
    controller). We receive personal information in the
    form of [attributes](/technical/attributes/)
    from your home identity provider, annotate and transform
    them, and then transfer them to the service provider you are logging into.

    Not all of the attributes we receive from your identity provider
    are necessarily sent to the service provider --- this is governed
    by our [attribute release policy](/safire/policy/arp/) (ARP) and in
    many cases we establish that the service provider has a **legitimate
    interest** in processing the personal information we release. However,
    irrespective of the basis for transfer, the first time you log into a
    given service provider and whenever your personal information changes
    **we will display all the personal information that will be passed to
    that provider**. Where legitimate interest has not been established,
    we give you the opportunity to abort the login process if you are
    uncomfortable with the information being transferred. Thus the transfer
    notification we display may also collect your **consent** for
    processing in some circumstances.

  * Every time you try and log in via the Federation Hub, we log a
    timestamp, details of the identity- and service-providers involved,
    and the result of the authentication. The logs may sometimes also
    record your username and affiliation information, although this is
    not typically collected. This information is collected to allow us
    to resolve security incidents and debug problems.

  * We maintain public websites (including the Federation Hub) where we
    collect normal web server logs, i.e. timestamp of access, IP address
    which requested the page, the page being requested, the HTML result
    code, etc. The data collected is for the purpose of troubleshooting
    and debugging potential problems with SAFIRE web servers.

  * Personal information made available by SAFIRE participants in their
    metadata is made publicly available both in metadata aggregates
    and on the SAFIRE web page. This data may include name, surname,
    email address, phone number and affiliation to the entity. SAFIRE
    strongly advises participants to use role-based contacts rather than
    the personal ones.

  * We run various mailing lists to facilitate the operations of the
    federation, and these lists may make the personal information (name,
    email address) of subscribers available to other subscribers. In
    addition, when a subscriber posts to the list, the resulting email
    may be archived on a publically accessible web site.

SAFIRE has a legitimate interest in this data processing. There is a
legal obligation to retain some logs.

## Who do we share information with?

During the login process we share the attributes we've received or
generated with the appropriate service provider as described in our
[attribute release policy](/safire/policy/arp/).

We forward some anonymised statistical information about the use of
our services to the eduGAIN monitoring service operated by
[GÉANT](https://www.geant.org/) and located in Europe.

We make use of a third-party analytics service (Google Analytics)
to provide insight into how users interact with various websites,
including the Federation hub. This information is used to improve the
user interfaces for these sites. The analytics service may set cookies
within an end user's web browser, and these cookies may contain an
opaque identifier to uniquely identify the browser. In addition,
the analytics service may collect anonymous information about an
end user's browser (such as display size, version, capabilities,
etc). You may [opt out](https://tools.google.com/dlpage/gaoptout)
of this tracking.

The metadata aggregates we publish are publically available and contain
the contact details we are provided during entity registration.

## Cookies we set

When we display a list of attributes that we are being transferred to
a given service provider, we may set a cookie in your browser to
indicate that we've done so (where consent is required, you can opt
out of this by choosing the "only this time" option). The cookie contains
a [cryptographic hash](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographic_hash_function)
of the service provider name and the values of the attributes we sent so we
can detect when we need to re-display the notification page. [Clearing the
cookie]({{< ref "/users/help.md#changed-your-mind-about-sending-information-to-a-service-provider" >}})
has the effect of withdrawing any consent you may have given.

We also set cookies in your browser recording various session
identifiers, to ensure the smooth operations of the service and
so that you can log into other service providers without having
to re-authenticate. These cookies contain no personal information,
but do uniquely identify you.

## Personal Information retention

When facilitating a user log in, for operational efficiency the
Federation Hub may cache the attributes returned by the user’s home
organisation. These attributes may be stored either in memory or on disk,
but will not be retained for longer than eight hours.

Logs of authentications are kept for a period of six months (184 days).

Statistical and analytical data is currently retained indefinitely.

## Security

As noted above, the SAFIRE service is built to minimise the amount
of personal information we need to process and retain. We make
sure that all personal information is encrypted in transit between
providers. We also ensure that access to information such as logs is
limited, and we endeavour to follow industry best practices when it
comes to securing our infrastructure. See our [key management practice
statement](/safire/policy/kmps/) for further information.

## Corrections and objections

You have the right to ensure the data we process is accurate.
However, except in very limited circumstances, SAFIRE is not
responsible for the actual content of the attributes we process.
If there are errors in your personal information, you'd need to
contact your home organisation's IT help desk.

If you have any objection to the way we process your personal information,
you are welcome to abort any login process and [contact us]({{< ref
"/safire/contact/_index.md" >}}).

## Other documents

Further details of the SA NREN's handling of
personal information may be found in [TENET's Privacy
Policy](http://www.tenet.ac.za/doc/privacypolicy.pdf) and the [CSIR's
Privacy Notice](https://www.csir.co.za/node/2219).

Where they are known to us, the privacy statements of SAFIRE [identity providers]({{<
ref "/participants/idp/list.md" >}}) or [service providers]({{< ref
"/participants/sp/list.md" >}}) are shown on our web site and during
your first login.

Information on the privacy of the eduGAIN inter-federation service may
be found in their [Privacy Notice](https://edugain.org/privacy/).

Google Analytics has comprehensive
[privacy information](https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/6004245) available.

[^POPI]: Terminology from the Protection of Personal Information Act, 2013. Equivalent terminology from the European data protection directive (95/46/EC) and subsequent General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is given in parentheses.
